So, look down at your hands for a second.
Like, if you're sitting at a desk or even just holding your phone, really think about what you do when you type.
Yeah, you probably think you are, you know, just producing a sequence of discrete symbols, right?
One after the other.
Exactly.
You look at your fingers hitting the keys, and you just assume the reality of that action is a straight line.
Right.
Like, T-H-E space.
But today, we are going to completely dismantle that illusion.
We are looking at this paradigm-shifting paper that proves your hands are actually not typing symbols at all.
No, they're really not.
They're performing a highly complex, multidimensional, biological dance.
And the craziest part is that the machine you use every single day, your computer, is systematically ignoring almost all of it.
Yeah, it is.
It's throwing away, like, the vast majority of your expressive intent.
Yeah.
And honestly, by the time we finish this deep dive, you are going to look at typing, at how you interact with artificial intelligence, musical instruments, and, well, even human evolution through a completely different lens.
You'll realize that your hands are speaking this rich, continuous language that your digital world is just too deaf to hear right now.
Right.
So, the paper we are pulling from today is called Gesture Before Symbol, Recovering Latent Structure in Keyboard Input.
It was published on April 26th, 2026, by an independent researcher known as Flixian.
And, uh, I should warn you, it is dense.
I mean, it bridges biomechanics, high-level mathematics, software engineering.
But the core premise is so intuitive that once you see it, you really can't unsee it.
Okay, let's unpack this, because we have to start with the fundamental flaw in modern computing, right?
Yeah.
This concept the paper refers to as the structural lossiness of the keyboard.
Or, uh, my favorite term from the text, the great flattening.
Oh, the great flattening is just the perfect descriptor for it, because it really highlights this deeply ingrained assumption in computer science.
Which is what, exactly?
The assumption that human input is inherently a sequence of discrete, separate events.
You know, you push a button, the computer registers an electrical contact, and then it just orders that contact chronologically.
Right.
Which feels practical, I guess.
I mean, we've built the entire modern internet on that idea.
We have, but this model is structurally lossy.
It acts as this massive funnel that just destroys data.
I want to focus on what exactly we are losing here.
Hmm.
Because, uh, when I think about a skilled touch typist, I don't see someone poking a single key, lifting their hand, moving to the next key, and poking again.
Definitely not.
If you watch a programmer or, like, a novelist really get going, both hands are engaged in this continuous hover and strike pattern.
Mm-hmm.
Multiple fingers are moving, resting, pressing, and releasing simultaneously.
It's a temporally extended gesture.
Right.
And what's fascinating here is the physical mechanism of the key switch itself.
The paper actually calls the physical key switch a constraint accumulator.
The constraint accumulator.
Okay.
Break that down for me.
So think about the physical travel of a mechanical switch.
You're applying continuous analog pressure.
Your finger has a specific approach velocity, a specific angle, maybe a hesitation, or a sudden surge of confidence.
Yeah, there's a whole physical arc to it.
Exactly.
But the hardware has an actuation point.
At a very specific millimeter of travel, an electrical circuit closes.
The computer takes all of that rich analog continuous movement and just reduces it to a single binary threshold crossing, a key-down event.
It's reducing a continuous analog wave into a flat digital blip.
I mean, I play a little bit of piano, and I can't help but compare it to that.
Oh, that's a perfect analogy.
Like if I press a piano key slowly, the hammer strikes the string gently.
If I slam it, it strikes hard.
The velocity, the weight of my arm, it all changes the acoustic output.
Right.
The instrument responds to your intent.
But on a computer keyboard, whether I gently depress the A key or strike it with the fury of a thousand suns, the computer just registers A.
The feeling, the how, is completely erased.
The how is erased, yes.
But even more shockingly, the when of the release is erased, too.
Wait, really?
The computer doesn't know when I let go.
Well, the firmware on your keyboard motherboard absolutely notices when you let go of a key.
It sends a key-up signal down the wire.
But the software stack, like your operating system, your word processor, actively discards that information.
That is wild.
Yeah, text entry, as defined by modern software, cares almost exclusively about when a key goes down.
Okay, wait, I need to push back on this a bit.
Yeah.
Because I want to play devil's advocate for the software engineers who built this world.
Fair enough.
If this flat sequence model works so well for getting emails sent and code written, why does losing the key-up data actually matter?
Isn't mechanical efficiency the whole point?
I mean, that is the standard defense of the status quo.
Right, like if my goal is just to get the word banana onto the screen, I don't necessarily care if the computer appreciates the subtle ballet of my fingers, you know?
Sure, but there are two severe consequences to this lossiness.
The first is that we are artificially crippling our expressive modalities.
If we actually preserve that temporal and relational data, the overlap, the velocity, the release, we could map your typing gesture directly to a musical synthesizer.
You could play a complex symphony using the exact same muscle memory you use to write an email.
Because the computer would finally be reading the geometry of the gesture, not just the text output.
Exactly, but the second consequence is the cognitive one.
The paper implies we are making the human brain do unnecessary translation work.
Right, we are imposing a massive cognitive tax.
Yes, we are forcing the biological organism to translate its natural, concurrent, gestural intention into a rigid, serialized sequence that the machine can digest.
We are working for the machine.
And the most glaring, undeniable proof of this broken system is sitting at the bottom of your keyboard right now.
Yes, the space bar.
This was the moment in the paper where I literally had to put a document down and stare at my hands.
The paper calls the space bar a vestigial organ.
It is an evolutionary artifact of a blind system.
I mean, think about the physical act of typing a word.
Biomechanically, a word is a single gesture.
Okay, yeah.
When you finish executing that gesture, what happens?
Your hands momentarily lift.
There is a fraction of a millisecond where all ten fingers disengage from the board as your brain resets the geometry for the next word.
It's a physiological pause.
A full release.
Right.
In a system that actually reads the continuous gesture of your hands, a full release naturally signals a word boundary.
Yeah.
The machine wouldn't need to be told the word is over.
It would just feel that the gesture is over.
Oh, wow.
So because our software blindly throws the key up events into the trash, it has absolutely no awareness of when your fingers leave the keys.
Exactly. It's completely deaf to the physical reality of your hands lifting.
So the engineers who built the typewriter had to invent a giant clunky button to artificially inject a symbol that says, hey, I stopped typing.
The space bar is a hack.
It is literally a fake character designed to compensate for the fact that we flattened the data.
That is just wild to me.
If you look at stenography, which court reporters use, they type in chords, they press multiple keys at once and release them together.
They preserve the full stroke and release data.
And guess what?
A Stenotype machine does not have a space bar.
Exactly. It doesn't need one.
We are dedicating our entire thumbs to hitting this massive piece of plastic millions of times a year, purely because of a software limitation from the 1970s.
And this limitation isn't just a quirky tech history fact.
It violates something profound about how humans evolved to interact with the world.
The title of the paper, Gesture Before Symbol, isn't just a metaphor.
It is a biological reality.
Which brings us to the developmental psychology part of the paper.
This is where the scope of the research really expands, I think.
It does. We aren't just talking about hardware anymore.
We are talking about how intention forms in the human brain.
So where do we start with that?
If we connect this to the bigger picture, we have to look at ontogeny, the developmental history of an individual.
Before a human infant ever utters a recognizable spoken word, they establish communication through deictive gestures.
The ictic gestures, like pointing at things.
Yes. Between 10 and 14 months of age, infants begin pointing, reaching, and showing.
Right. They use their bodies to establish shared attention.
A toddler points at a toy on a shelf, looks at their parent, and looks back at the toy.
They are communicating a very specific intent.
I want that, or look at that.
And the crucial detail is that the physical motor movement, the gesture, exists and functions perfectly as a communicative act long before the symbolic spoken language arrives.
The gesture is the foundational scaffolding.
As the child develops, the spoken word for toy is eventually learned, but it doesn't replace the intention.
It is essentially poured into the pre-existing mold of the pointing gesture.
Here's where it gets really interesting for me.
I was trying to visualize this relationship between the physical gesture and the abstract symbol.
Okay. What did you come up with?
It feels like the relationship between a physical body and clothing.
The body, with all its joints, arcs, and physical dimensions, exists first.
It moves. It has a natural, grounded reality.
Yeah.
The clothing, the abstract symbol, the spoken word, the text on a screen, is tailored to fit the shape of the movement that is already happening.
You don't build the clothing first and then try to stuff a human into it.
The word is tailored to the gesture.
That analogy captures the ontogenetic process perfectly.
The gesture selects the object.
The word merely decorates the selection.
And this precedence of gesture over symbol isn't unique to human development, is it?
No.
We see it in our evolutionary history, too, our phylogeny.
The primate research cited in the paper is fascinating here.
They look at enculturated great apes, like chimpanzees and bonobos, who have been taught to use symbolic lexigrams.
Right. Those boards with abstract symbols they can press to ask for things.
Yeah. And researchers consistently observe that these apes will rely on physical gestures, reaching, pointing, leading a human by the hand, to indicate their desires long before they master the abstract symbolic lexigrams for those same desires.
Gesture is an evolutionarily older, biologically cheaper substrate.
It is deeply grounded in our physical environment.
Symbols are a high-level, cognitively expensive compression format layered on top.
Okay, but let me challenge how this applies to me sitting at a desk.
Yeah.
Because when I type an email, my internal monologue is speaking the words.
Sure.
I am thinking, I need to type T, then H, then E.
It feels incredibly symbolic and sequential.
It doesn't feel like I'm a toddler pointing at a bottle, you know?
Well, it feels sequential because you are only observing the exhaust fumes of your brain's processing.
Exhaust fumes.
Yeah.
The paper brings up Carl Lashley, an early 20th century psychologist who posed a foundational challenge called the problem of serial order in behavior.
I remember that section.
What did Lashley prove exactly?
Lashley proved that the surface sequence of an action, the chronological order in which things happen, cannot possibly be how the brain plans or represents the action.
Why not?
If I type M-A-C-H-I-N-E, why isn't my brain just sending seven consecutive commands down my arm?
Because of the speed of neural transmission, if your brain had to consciously wait for the feedback of your finger hitting M, process that it was successful, and then issue a separate sequential command for A, you would type at a glacial pace.
Oh, I see.
You would be incredibly clumsy.
Think about swinging a golf club or playing a fast run on a violin.
Yeah.
If you are consciously firing individual muscles in sequence, you will fail.
Like when you suddenly think about how you're walking and you try to manually control your calves and your quads, and you end up just tripping over your own feet.
Yes.
The brain doesn't plan sequences as individual discrete steps.
It plans actions as pre-sequential hierarchical structures.
So it conceives of the entire movement, the entire word, as a single unified gestural block.
Exactly.
It sends that massive block of data to your motor cortex, which then unfolds it into physical movement.
So when I type, my brain isn't fetching characters from a dictionary one by one.
It is executing a single communicative reach toward the keyboard.
It is a relational motor act.
The sequential appearance of keys on the screen is just a byproduct of that physical reach intercepting with the plastic buttons.
And because it is a physical bodily movement rather than a list of letters, it has an anatomy.
It has a physical structure that we can map and measure.
This is where fliction takes the biological concept and begins to apply intense biomechanical analysis to the typist's hands.
This moves us into how our hands actually organize themselves in space.
If touch typing is this fluid, messy, biological reach, what does the internal architecture of that movement look like?
Well, the paper constructs a hierarchical gesture space.
It breaks the movement down into three levels.
Finger domains, hand layers, and the most crucial one, inter-hand relations.
Let's start at the micro level, the finger domains.
This isn't just about knowing which finger goes on which key, right?
No, it goes much deeper than conscious knowledge.
A trained touch typist undergoes spatial partitioning.
Like, the left pinky completely owns the Q, A, and Z territory.
The brain internalizes this not as a rule, but as a persistent physical mapping of the environment.
Exactly.
And within these domains, the fingers don't wait their turn.
Right.
The raw data shows simultaneity.
We call them microchords.
If you bypass the operating system and look at the raw hardware timestamps of a fast typist,
you will see multiple keys depressed within tens of milliseconds of each other.
So the brain issues the command for a syllable, and three fingers fire almost simultaneously,
their activation overlapping in time.
They are intended as a single, coordinated block.
Which builds up to the hand layer, where the fingers aggregate into rolling motions,
rolling inward toward the thumbs or outward toward the pinkies.
But the structure that really captivated me was the top level, the inter-hand relations.
Because we were using two hands, and they are definitely not doing the same job.
They act as a tightly coupled, highly asymmetrical geometric system.
In almost any complex typing gesture, one hand assumes the role of the anchor,
while the other becomes the pivot hand.
The anchor hand.
Meaning it stabilizes the movement.
It provides context and sustained contact.
The anchor hand might hold down the shift key,
or it might just rest heavily on a specific cluster of letters, moving very little.
It roots the geometry of the gesture.
And while the anchor is stable...
The pivot hand executes the dynamic, high-frequency, complex sweeps across the board.
I have a personal anecdote that maps perfectly onto this.
I've played piano since I was a kid,
and a few years ago, I realized my typing style completely mirrors my piano playing.
Oh, really? How so?
On the piano, my left hand is practically glued to the lower octaves,
playing these steady, anchoring bass chords.
My right hand is flying all over the upper octaves, doing the fast, melodic runs.
That makes perfect sense.
Yeah.
I got myself typing a long, complicated email,
and realized my left hand was resting heavily on the left side of the board,
barely lifting, just kind of rolling,
while my right hand was flying back and forth, hitting all the vowels and punctuation.
That is not a coincidence at all.
The relational manifold your brain uses to coordinate two hands in space
is identical whether you are hitting ebony and ivory or plastic keycaps.
The bass line is the anchor.
The melody is the pivot.
The music analogy is mathematically sound here.
And to understand how this music is composed on a keyboard,
we have to look at the fundamental atom of typing.
The paper calls it the slingshot arc.
The slingshot arc.
This is the canonical unit of the gesture.
It consists of three phases.
Approach, pivot, and release.
The approach is just the fingers moving toward a target cluster.
But the pivot is the crucial phase.
What defines the pivot?
The pivot occurs when one or more fingers reverse their trajectory
while remaining in physical contact under constraint.
So my finger pushes down on a key,
hits the bottom of the plastic travel distance,
and while it is still pressing down,
my hand is already twisting to launch my other finger toward the next key.
Right.
The key you're holding down becomes a physical pivot point for the rest of your hand.
It is a moment of maximal constraint.
You use the physical resistance of the key bottoming out
to slingshot your hand's momentum in a new direction.
And then finally, you have the release phase where the fingers disengage.
Let's ground this in the specific example the paper uses.
The word machine.
M-A-C-H-I-N-E.
If I look at the screen, I see seven discrete symbols.
But you are saying my hands do not experience seven symbols.
No, your hands experience three connected slingshot arcs.
Let's break it down biomechanically.
The first arc is M to A.
Your right index finger approaches M.
Your left pinky approaches A.
Okay, got it.
But A is the pivot point.
Your left pinky presses into the A key,
and while it is anchored there,
your hands are already reorienting.
Because they have to travel across the board to hit the C and the H.
Exactly.
So from the A pivot, you launch into the second arc, A to C-H.
Your left index finger moves to C,
and your right index finger flies up to the H.
Now the H becomes the next moment of maximal constraint,
the new pivot.
I can actually feel that when I airtype it.
My right index finger digs into the H,
and the momentum from that strike swings my right hand down to hit the I.
Which launches the third arc, I-N-E,
and the right hand hits I, sweeps to N,
and the N acts as a turnaround pivot
that slingshots your left hand back up to hit the E.
And finally, a full release.
So M-A-A-C-H-I-N-E.
Three physical arcs chained together seamlessly
because they share pivot points.
The A connects the first two arcs.
The H connects the second and third.
It is a continuous topological structure.
This biomechanical reality explains something
every typist intuitively feels, but rarely articulates.
Why do some words feel incredibly satisfying to type,
and others feel like you are fighting the keyboard?
Oh, totally.
It's all about hand assignment and arc smoothness.
Like, typing a word like power feels like a drum fill.
It just rolls off the hands.
But typing a word like minimum feels like running through knee-deep mud.
Exactly.
Power alternates hands beautifully,
creating wide-sweeping slingshot arcs.
Minimum forces your right hand to act as both the anchor and the pivot
repeatedly in a highly cramped geometric space.
It violates the natural grammar of the hands.
It's a bad chord.
This makes me wonder about individuality, though.
If we all have to hit the exact same plastic squares to spell machine,
and my hands are performing these slingshot arcs,
why does my typing look so different from someone else's?
What do you mean?
I've worked in offices where one guy types like an angry bear hammering nails,
and the woman next to him barely looks like her fingers are moving.
Ah.
Well, the physical constraints of the keyboard are universal,
but the compiled motor patterns,
the specific way your unique physiology solves the geometric problem of chaining those pivots
is deeply individual.
It is a compiled motor habit.
Like handwriting.
Yeah, exactly.
Actually, I'd argue it's even deeper than handwriting.
Handwriting is visual.
This is a high-frequency temporal signature.
Biometric identifiers that track keystroke dynamics rely heavily on these structures.
Because the density of your pivots,
the specific way you overlap keys on an approach,
the velocity of your release,
it is a biometric fingerprint.
Because you aren't just thinking of letters.
Your nervous system is executing a highly specific,
deeply ingrained physical dance.
Okay, so we have established a completely new reality here.
Typing is a fluid, continuous, messy, highly individual,
biological ballet of slingshot arcs and pivots.
Right.
But here's the wall we eventually hit.
I am typing into a digital computer.
The computer doesn't care about my biological ballet.
It needs crisp, digital ones and zeros.
It needs math.
It does.
So how do we mathematically rescue this sloppy human gesture from being flattened?
How do we build a bridge between the biological reality of my hands
and the digital output of the screen?
This is where the paper transitions from biology into deep mathematics.
To rescue the gesture,
Flitian introduces two critical mathematical operators,
canonicalization and projection.
Let's tackle canonicalization first.
The paper denotes it with the letter C.
My first thought when I read this was that
it just sounds like a fancy academic word for autocorrect.
Is the computer just rounding my sloppy typing up to the nearest perfect keystroke?
No, it is fundamentally different from autocorrect.
Autocorrect looks at the discrete letters you have already outputted,
checks a dictionary,
and guesses what word you meant to spell.
Canonicalization doesn't look at letters at all.
It looks at the geometric topology of your knuckles and fingers in time.
The raw data coming from your hands is incredibly noisy.
Because if I type machine ten times,
the exact millisecond timing of my finger strikes will vary every single time.
My fingers might strike the keys slightly off-center.
It's biological jitter.
Your hands get tired, you drink too much coffee, the timing shifts.
Right.
If a computer tries to interpret that raw, jittery data directly,
the noise overwhelms the signal.
So the canonicalization operator, the C operator, acts as a structural filter.
What does the filter out?
It takes the messy trajectory of raw hand data
and collapses it into what mathematicians call equivalence classes.
I am going to need an analogy for equivalence classes.
Because if the computer is collapsing data,
isn't that just the great flattening all over again?
No, it's the opposite of the flattening.
The flattening throws away the topology to keep the symbols.
Canonicalization throws away the noise to keep the topology.
Give me a way to visualize that.
Think about recognizing a melody.
Let's use the song Happy Birthday.
I can play it on a pristine grand piano.
I can play it on a cheap plastic kazoo.
I can sing it slightly out of tune.
I can play it twice as fast or add a jazz swing rhythm to it.
The raw acoustic data of those performances is completely different.
The frequencies, the timing, the timbre.
Yet your brain instantly recognizes every single one of them as happy birthday.
Why?
Because your brain canonicalizes the auditory input.
Oh, I see.
It strips away the kazoo noise, the bad tuning, and the tempo variations,
and it extracts the underlying relationship between the notes.
The sequence of intervals, the topology of the song, is the melody.
That is a brilliant way to frame it.
So what is the melody of my hand movement?
What are the topological features that canonicalization actually preserves?
The paper identifies three core features.
Overlap, pivots, and segmentation.
Who is overlapping with whom?
Where did the fingers reverse direction under sustained constraint?
And when did the hands fully release from the board?
Overlap, pivot, segmentation.
The bones of the gesture.
Canonicalization preserves those bones.
It creates a clean, idealized, canonical version of the gesture.
It extracts the pure intent from the noisy execution.
And once you have that clean, canonical gesture, you can do something truly miraculous with it.
That leads us to the second operator.
Projection.
Denoted by the Greek letter phi.
Right.
Because canonicalization gives us the clean, physical intent.
But pure intent doesn't put words in an email.
We have to map it to something useful.
The canonical gesture exists independently of any output.
It is just a geometric reality.
The projection operator is the mechanism that maps that intent into a specific domain.
The most common domain is text, which the paper labels sigma star.
You project the gesture, and the computer outputs the text's string machine.
But the paper introduces this concept of metric independence, which completely blew my mind.
Metric independence states that the underlying canonical gesture is completely agnostic to the output mapping.
Because the gesture is just a relational geometry of pivots and overlaps,
you can swap out the projection layer entirely without changing the physical gesture itself.
Meaning I could project to something other than text.
Exactly.
You could project the exact same gesture into a musical pitch time structure,
which the paper denotes as M.
Or you could project it into a visual form, V, like rendering a vector graphic on a screen.
Let me make sure I am fully grasping the weight of this.
Yeah.
Are you saying I could spend years learning the muscle memory to type out an essay,
learning how the slingshot arcs feel when spelling words?
Yes.
And then, without having to relearn a single physical movement,
I could flip a software switch, perform the exact same physical typing motion,
and it would generate a complex, perfectly structured synthesizer solo.
Yes.
The motor vocabulary remains invariant.
Only the projection changes.
You are speaking the identical physical language with your hands,
but the computer is translating it into a different dialect.
That is wild.
The paper proves this through a commutativity diagram.
It demonstrates mathematically that the canonical gesture doesn't lose any semantic weight.
Whether you canonicalize the noisy raw stream first and then project it to text,
or if you had an impossibly perfect AI try to interpret the raw stream directly,
the result converges.
So, canonicalization is perfectly safe.
It preserves 100% of the meaning while discarding 100% of the noise.
Exactly.
Okay.
This is a beautiful mathematical bridge.
We extract the pure gesture and we project it.
But here's the massive logic trap that jumped out at me while reading.
Okay, let's hear it.
Let's say I perform a beautifully clean, perfectly canonical gesture.
But that specific movement pattern happens to project to a complete nonsense word,
like QWXZ.
Right.
Or, if I am projecting to music,
it maps to a cluster of notes that clash horribly and don't fit the key.
A clean gesture doesn't guarantee a coherent output.
How does the system know if the projection it just created makes any actual sense?
Ah, you have hit the exact crux of the interpretation problem.
And to solve it, we have to enter the deepest waters of the paper.
Section 5.
Admissibility and Amplitwists.
This is the physics of interpretation.
I am not going to lie.
This section of the paper required three cups of coffee and a lot of pacing around my living room.
We are dealing with some heavy mathematical concepts here.
We are, but the underlying logic is highly accessible.
To prevent the system from outputting QWXZ,
it requires a constraint layer, a reality check.
The paper calls this the admissibility functional, denoted by A.
Admissibility, as in, is this output admissible?
Does it follow the rules of the language?
Precisely.
It evaluates whether a given gesture-projection pair is coherent.
The system tracks these constraints over time in an admissibility log.
And what happens if it's not coherent?
If the local segments of your gesture, the individual slingshot arcs,
don't logically glue together into a global coherent word,
the system registers an obstruction, denoted by epsilon.
An obstruction.
How does the math define a failure to glue together?
The paper models this using topology and sheaf cohomology.
Okay, stop right there.
Sheaf cohomology.
That is an incredibly intimidating term.
You cannot just drop that without walking me through how it works.
Let's visualize it.
Sheaf cohomology is essentially the mathematics of local versus global data.
Imagine an Escher staircase.
You know the optical illusion where monks are walking up a square staircase infinitely.
Yes, the Penrose stairs.
No matter how much you walk up, you never reach the top.
Right.
If you zoom in and look at any local section of that drawing,
just two or three steps,
it makes perfect geometric sense.
Yes, the local data is valid.
Okay, I'm with you.
But when you try to stitch all those local patches together into a single global 3D object,
it fails.
The geometry contradicts itself.
In sheaf cohomology,
that global failure to stitch together local data is called a non-trivial cohomology class.
Oh.
So if my left hand does a slingshot arc that looks like QW
and my right hand does an arc that looks like XE,
locally they might be perfectly clean physical movements.
Yes.
But when the computer tries to stitch them together globally into a single English word,
it creates an Escher staircase.
It contradicts the rules of the language.
Exactly.
The failure to mean something isn't just a typo.
It is a structural geometric failure on the manifold.
The obstruction, epsilon, is the system recognizing that the geometry is impossible.
So how does the computer actually resolve this in real time?
Because the paper introduces this concept called the Amplet-Whisk cascade and RSVP fields
to explain how this system evaluates meaning dynamically.
What's fascinating here is how the paper reimagines the very nature of computing meaning.
It doesn't look up words in a static dictionary.
It induces a trajectory in what it calls an epistemic manifold.
An epistemic manifold.
The landscape of possible knowledge.
A lot of computer science papers compare this to water flowing down a mountain to find the lowest point.
They do.
But earlier we talked about how that analogy falls a bit flat because mountains don't change shape.
The paper talks about lie algebraic deformations, meaning the landscape itself is warping.
Which is why the mountain analogy is insufficient.
Let's use a different metaphor.
Imagine meaning isn't a static location.
Imagine a giant, highly flexible trampoline.
The fabric of the trampoline is the epistemic manifold.
All the potential words and meanings in the system.
Okay, I have a giant trampoline in my head.
Now the RSVP fields, the scalar vector and entropy fields mentioned in the paper,
represent the tension of the fabric, the rules of spelling, the grammar,
the physical biomechanics of your fingers.
So it's pulled tight by these rules.
When your hands execute a canonical gesture, it is like dropping a heavy bowling ball onto a specific spot on the trampoline.
The bowling ball instantly warps the fabric.
The trampoline deforms.
That deformation is the lie algebraic deformation.
The shape of the space changes based on the constraints of your gesture.
Now throw a handful of marbles onto the trampoline.
The marbles represent the computer's attempt to guess your intent.
Where do the marbles go?
They immediately roll down the curve created by the bowling ball.
They gather at the lowest, deepest point of the warp.
Yes.
The system is constantly running an internal repair process,
descending toward lower entropy.
Entropy is uncertainty.
As the marbles roll down into the tight pocket created by the bowling ball,
uncertainty decreases.
And the paper relates this to CLIO, right?
Yes.
This process is based on the CLIO framework cognitive loop via in-situ optimization.
The paper reinterprets CLIO as a gradient flow on cascade energy.
The rolling of the marbles is the gradient flow.
And when the marbles finally pool at the very bottom,
completely stable and resting together,
they have reached what the paper calls a vorticity attractor.
That stable pocket is the intended meaning.
If the marble settles smoothly, the gesture is admissible.
The computer confidently outputs machine.
But what if I type pure gibberish?
What if I drop three different bowling balls on opposite sides of the trampoline?
The fabric warps chaotically.
The marbles roll around aimlessly, getting stuck on ridges, never finding a single stable pocket.
The system registers high entropy, an obstruction, an Escher staircase.
The output is inadmissible.
That completely shatters how I view my computer.
Meaning isn't a file cabinet that opens to retrieve a static file.
Meaning is the stationary structure of an entropy-weighted, gesture-driven flow.
The computer is running a real-time physics simulation of my intent.
Which brings up an incredibly timely parallel.
Think about the language the paper uses.
A system constantly running a repair process, navigating constraints, descending toward lower entropy to guess human intent.
What else does that?
Large language models.
Yeah.
Artificial intelligence.
When I give a prompt to an AI agent, and it churns for five seconds before spitting out an answer,
it is rolling marbles on a massive trampoline trying to find the lowest entropy state that satisfies my prompt.
If we connect this to the bigger picture, the gesture framework forces us to completely redefine our relationship with artificial intelligence.
This takes us into the paper's most philosophical territory.
Tools, agents, and the illusion of autonomy.
The illusion of autonomy.
We are currently living through a gold rush of AI autonomy.
Every tech company wants to build an agent that operates completely independently in a black box.
You tell it what you want, you step back, and it does the work.
And the paper argues that this binary distinction we make between a dumb tool like a trace keyboard and a smart agent like an LLM is a false dichotomy.
By false.
The difference isn't about the intrinsic intelligence of the software.
The difference is defined by a single temporal variable.
Control resolution, mathematically denoted as delta control.
Delta control, the temporal resolution at which the human can intervene in the system.
Let's break down a high intervention system, which we typically call a tool.
In a tool, delta type control approaches zero.
The time gap between your physical action and the system's reaction is almost non-existent.
You are continuously coupled to the system.
Let's look at this microsecond by microsecond.
I am typing the word machine, but I accidentally hit the B key instead of the N.
I see the B appear on screen mid-gesture.
My brain instantly registers the obstruction.
I hit backspace and I correct the arc.
The crucial point is where the repair loop happens.
In a high intervention tool, the repair loop is external.
The water finding the lake, the marbles finding the pocket, you are manually guiding that process in real time.
You evaluate the amusability and you steer the flow instantly because the coupling is continuous.
Now contrast that with a low intervention system, an agent.
Right.
In an agent, delta T control is large.
It could be seconds, minutes, or hours.
You provide a single initial gesture, a text prompt, a click, and then you are locked out.
You're just waiting.
The system takes your prompt, puts it inside an autonomous black box,
and runs its internal physics simulation trying to resolve misability without you.
You simply have to wait.
Eventually, it hands you a finished output.
I am throwing the bowling ball onto the trampoline and then the lights turn off.
I can't see the marbles roll.
I just have to hope they found the right pocket when the lights come back on.
And if they didn't, I have to start all over with a new prompt.
Exactly.
And here's the radical thesis Fliction puts forward.
We tend to assume that the black box agent is intelligent and the high intervention tool is dumb.
Right.
Because the agent does things by itself.
But if a tool perfectly preserves the relational structure of your continuous gesture,
the intelligence doesn't reside in the software alone.
The intelligence belongs to the coupling of the human and the machine.
The intelligence is the resonance between us.
Think of a master violinist playing a Stradivarius.
A violin has zero internal artificial intelligence.
It is just wood and string.
But the delta-teed control is exactly zero.
The physical coupling is perfect.
Oh, I see where you're going with this.
When a master plays, the system as a whole human plus instrument exhibits breathtaking intelligence and complexity.
Highly coupled simple systems often feel incredibly powerful, sometimes more powerful than loosely coupled complex AI because they perfectly preserve human intent.
This flips the entire AI design philosophy on its head.
Instead of asking, how do we make this AI more autonomous so the human can step away?
It demands that we design systems that let users intervene in the repair process of LLMs mid-flight.
If the AI is rolling the marbles toward the wrong pocket, you shouldn't have to wait for it to fail, read the bad output, and write a new prompt.
You should be able to gesturally steer the flow in real time, nudging the manifold while the computer is still thinking.
Exactly.
That is a staggering vision for the future of software.
It's not a world of human versus AI or human replaced by AI.
It is human coupled with AI at a sub-millisecond biomechanical level.
We become the anchor, the AI becomes the pivot.
But to build these highly coupled gesture-first systems, we run into a very practical, immediate problem.
Right.
If we want our computers to read this intricate ballet of slingshot arcs and measure the delta-type control in milliseconds and track our hands like a symphony, do we need to invent new technology?
That's the question.
Do we need to throw away our current keyboards and wear magical sci-fi haptic gloves with a thousand biometric sensors?
This is perhaps the most surprising and optimistic part of the entire paper.
The good news is, absolutely not.
We do not need new hardware.
The hardware revolution already happened.
You are telling me the standard plastic keyboard sitting on my desk right now is physically capable of capturing this multidimensional biological dance?
If you are using a relatively modern mechanical or gaming keyboard, yes.
The paper explicitly points out that existing hardware with QMK-compatible microcontrollers, true N-key rollover, and 1000 Hz polling rates are already producing this rich gesture data.
Let's define those for clarity.
N-key rollover means the keyboard matrix can register every single key being pressed at exactly the same time, without dropping or ghosting any of them.
It handles infinite simultaneity.
Yes.
The hardware does not artificially sequence the cords.
And 1000 Hz polling means the internal processor on the keyboard is taking a snapshot of the physical state of every switch 1000 times a second.
That is sub-millisecond resolution.
The hardware is physically capturing the ballet.
The constrained accumulators are firing with incredible continuous precision.
So, if the hardware is screaming all this beautiful, geometric, high-resolution data down the wire, what is the problem?
Why is my computer still treating it like a flat sequence?
I'm guessing the bottleneck is the software stack.
It is entirely the software stack.
It is the legacy protocols we use to communicate between the peripheral and the operating system.
Standard USB-HID protocols often default to lower polling rates, artificially throttling the data stream.
But the real culprit, as we discussed at the very beginning, is the operating system layer.
The OS actively putting its hands over its ears.
The OS semantic filtering explicitly says, I only want the keydown events, and I want them serialized in a single file line so I can print text.
But Fliction notes that we can bypass this right now.
On Linux, tools like the EvDev interface can completely bypass the OS text filtering layer.
We can grab the raw, sub-millisecond, time-stamped switch events directly from the kernel ring buffer.
So the data is already flowing.
We just need to write the software layers to catch it, canonicalize it, and project it.
And if we actually build that software bridge, the horizons the paper outlines are mind-ending.
One of the most massive future applications mentioned is security and cryptography.
The implications for continuous authentication are massive.
Keystroke dynamics are already a known field in security systems that try to verify if the person typing the password is actually you, based on the rhythm of your key presses.
But current implementations use raw timing data.
Which we established is full of biological jitter.
It's noisy, it's prone to false positives, or worse,
It can be spoofed by timing side-channel attacks where malicious software listens to the clicks.
Exactly.
But if an authentication system uses canonical gestures, the paradigm shifts.
Remember the equivalence classes.
The canonicalization operator strips away the raw timing noise,
which actually protects your privacy from those timing side-channel attacks.
Because the attacker just hears random jitter.
But what canonicalization preserves, the overlap patterns, the specific anchor-hand asymmetry you favor,
the density and geometric shape of your pivots, provides incredibly high structural entropy.
Structural entropy meaning those features are mathematically deeply unique to you, and incredibly hard to fake.
It is uniquely yours, and because it is based on compiled motor habits,
it is incredibly stable over time.
It allows for continuous, unbreakable authentication.
The computer doesn't just know it's you when you type your password,
it knows it's you on every single word you type,
authenticated by the deep topology of your muscle memory.
It's like a computer verifying your identity.
Not by scanning your eye,
but by feeling the unique rhythm of your heartbeat while you work.
That is incredible.
And beyond the hard security applications,
there are entirely new creative and linguistic horizons.
We could design esoteric input languages that break free from phonology.
Right now, we are bound to spelling out spoken words letter by letter.
But if the system understands gestures,
we could build languages based on motor control boundaries.
A specific slingshot sweep of the left hand,
combined with a pivot on the right,
could instantly project an entire complex software macro,
or a 3D architectural asset,
or a mathematical equation.
Which explains the skill transfer phenomenon the paper hints at.
It mathematically proves why a skilled typist
can often intuitively learn to operate a complex physical machine like a backhoe,
or learn to play a musical instrument quickly.
The underlying relational manifold,
the brain's deep capacity to plan hierarchical,
asymmetrical, anchor-pivot physical movements,
is identical.
The human is already fluent in the physical language.
We just need to change the projection layer in the software to unlock it.
If I were to summarize the frustration and the promise of this entire situation,
here's the analogy I arrive at.
What we're doing right now with current keyboard software
is like buying a top-of-the-line $100,000 8K cinema camera.
Okay, I like this.
The lenses are optically perfect.
The sensor is capturing breathtaking,
full-color, high-frame-rate reality.
But the software installed on the camera forces you to only print out grainy,
black-and-white, still-framed Polaroids.
And we've all been passing these Polaroids around for 40 years,
convinced that the Polaroid is all there is.
The hardware is ready.
The human hands are more than ready.
It is only our software imagination that is lagging behind.
Speculating on what an operating system built natively on this continuous gesture space would feel like.
It wouldn't feel like typing at a terminal.
No, it would feel deeply musical.
You wouldn't be entering discrete commands into a machine.
You would be physically conducting your computer.
Okay, we need to take a breath and review the arc of this deep dive,
because we have covered an immense amount of ground today.
We really have.
We started by looking down at the humble keyboard
and realizing that its core operating principle is structurally lossy.
We are suffering from the Great Flattening,
a software paradigm that crushes our multi-dimensional hand ballet into a flat line of text,
leaving us with residual hacks like the space bar
just to compensate for ignoring the physical release of our own fingers.
Then we traced the roots of that physical movement back to the biology of intention.
We looked at how infants and our evolutionary primate ancestors rely on physical gestures
to establish communication long before abstract symbols are ever introduced.
Right.
We realized that the sequential letters on our screen
are just the exhaust fumes of a unified pre-sequential motor plan orchestrated by the brain.
They put the topist hands under a microscope and mapped the anatomy of the arc.
We saw how the hands divide labor into stable anchors and dynamic pivots,
chaining together slingshot motions to create a continuous geometry of movement.
And then we walked across the mathematical bridge.
We explored how canonicalization strips away the biological noise
to extract the topological bones of the gesture,
and how projection allows us to map that pure intent into text, music, or art
with total metric independence.
We navigated the ampletwist cascade,
dropping bowling balls onto the flexible trampoline of the epistemic manifold.
We saw how the system evaluates admissibility by acting as a gradient flow,
seeking the lowest entropy state to solidify meaning.
Which completely reframed our understanding of AI autonomy.
We realized that true power doesn't necessarily lie in building black box agents that lock us out,
but in reducing the control resolution, the DeltaTet control,
so that our physical gestures are intimately, instantly coupled with the machine's repair process.
And we ended with the revelation that the hardware sitting on your desk right now
is already capturing this reality.
The revolution merely requires us to rewrite the software stack to stop putting its hands over its ears.
It is a profound, beautiful paradigm shift.
And it leaves me with one final thought to mull over.
Something I want you to take away from all this math and computer science
and apply to your daily life.
What's that?
Next time you sit down at your desk to send a mundane email or write a report,
I want you to pause and physically look down at your hands resting on those plastic keys.
You aren't just pushing buttons.
You are performing.
You are expressing a complex, evolutionary, biomechanical motor language
that your computer is currently deaf to.
The poetry is already in your fingertips.
The machine just isn't recording the music.
Exactly.
But it makes you wonder.
If your hands are already speaking a richer, deeper, more continuous language
than your devices can hear.
What else is your body, your physical presence,
trying to express that our modern hyper-digital reality
is forcing you to compress, flatten, and silence?
That is the ultimate question we will have to answer
as we design the next generation of our digital tools.
Thank you so much for joining us on this deep dive.
It's been an absolute mind-bender,
and I can guarantee you will never look at your keyboard the same way again.